Q- how React reconciliation works?
    React uses virtual dom is a copy of actual DOM tree, 
    using diffing algroithm, whenever any state or props changes in the application, 
    it compares the new vitual dom with the previous one and identofy which element has changed.
    and instead of updating whole DOM tree it only updates the element which are added/removed.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Q- Advantages and disadvantages of using a CSS framework
    It improves development speed, had built in responsiveness, however they can increase bundle size, dependency or less flexiblity.
    I prefer using utility-first frameworks like Tailwind with proper configuration to balance speed and maintainabilit

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Q- An example to check understanding of reference data type of javascript?

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Q- Asset delivery optimisation on web pages
    Using code splitting, Remove unused css, minify JS/CSS, Use WebP for better size of image, loading lazy, using CDN, caching
    Compression like GZIP, Font optimization, less network request, remove or load less important scripts.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Q- What are Semantic Tags?
    Better for accessiblity and seo, like header, footer, nav, main, section, etc

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Q- What is closure and what purpose does it serve in javascript?
    A closure is the combination of a function and its surrounding state (lexical environment), which gives the function 
    continuous access to its outer scope's variables.
    
    Because of lexical scoping

    What Purpose Does Closure Serve?
    - Data Encapsulation (Private Variables)
    - currying

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Q- What is an event loop?(while answers include macro and micro queue both).
    Event loop is a JavaScript runtime mechanism that enables asynchronous programming by constantly monitoring the call stack
    and task queues, allowing the single-threaded engine to handle tasks without blocking the main thread. It executes synchronous 
    code first, then fully processes all tasks in the microtask queue (high priority, e.g., Promises) before handling one macrotask
    (e.g., setTimeout). 

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Q- What happens if key prop is missing in list?
    Keys provide identity to list elements, enabling efficient reconciliation and correct state preservation.
    Unnecessary re-renders, Incorrect DOM updates, UI Bugs - why - React’s reconciliation algorithm uses key to: which element change/add/removed.

    And what if we use index as key? what are problems?
    Using index as key is problematic when items are added/deleted, filtered
    It cause performance issues, wrong state mapping, re-rendeing every item in list

Q- Controlled vs Uncontrolled
    Controlled - React handle the data of the form, usefule - easy data validation, dis - potentioal re-render
    Uncontrolled - DOM manages the state, just like regular HTML form, in react use - ref. Usefule - less re-render, harder to validate

Q- What is Hydration?
    It happens in SSR app, (server send HTML, browser rende HTML, React attach event listener, React make it interactive)
    Large JS bundle makes slower Hydration - as to dowload, parse and execeute code on main thread slows down.
    We can use Code Splitting and Lazyloading, Partial Hydration, Reduce bundle Size(light library).

Q- What is React Batching?
    React batches multiple state updates into a single re-render for performance optimization.
    In React-18, batching works in event handler, setTimeout, promise, native events

Q- What is Suspense?
    It improved performance and used with lazy loaded component. show fallback UI while waiting for lazy comp

Q- useEffect vs useLayoutEffect?
    useEffect runs after paint and it is non-blocking(asynchronous), used for api calls, timers, subscr.
    wherease layout runs before paint and it is blocking, use only when we need to measure or mutate the dom synchronous.
    useEffect -> Render - Paint - useEffect
    useLayoutEffect -> Render - useLayoutEffect - Paint ( runs synchronous after react perform all dom mutate, but before browser paint)

Q- What is Stale Closure?
    Closures capture variables at the time the function is created., so without dependency array in useEffect can cause stale data

Q- How to optimise large items of list like 3000+ list of items and when we search
    Using Pagination, load More, infinite scroll, virtualization, debounce search input, memozie items, lazy load image
    use Suspension, cache search queries

Q- What is React Fiber?
    Fiber enables React to prioritize urgent updates like user input over non-urgent updates like rendering large lists.
    benefits - Prioritizing updates, Pausing and resuming rendering, Incremental rendering

Q- How to handle race condition in API calls?
    To prevent stale responses overriding latest search results, I would cancel previous API calls using AbortController.
    By using AbortController
    ex - inventory stock of last item ,coupon multiple time use, banking transaction

Q- What is React Concurrent Mode?
    Concurrent rendering improves perceived performance by prioritizing urgent updates over heavy UI updates.
    It allows react to decide - Prioritize urgent updates, Interrupt rendering. enabled by startTransition, useTransition, Suspense

Q- InterFace vs type
    interface - mainly for object, can be extended and merged
    type - more flexible, can represent union, primitives

Q- What is Generics?
    Generics let you write reusable, type-safe code that works with multiple types instead of hardcoding a specific one

Q- What is utility type? Name 3.

Q- Render and commit phase in React
    Render phase is pure and side-effect free, commit phase mutates the DOM.
    Render - Calculate what changes needed and computation phase
    Commit - applied changes to DOM, runs useEffect, runs lifecycle menthods

Q- what is Hydration Mismatch
    The server and client must produce identical output on the first render. 
    Anything dynamic or browser-specific should be deferred to useEffect so it only runs after hydration is complete.
    ex - browser apis, time based func (math.random, new Date()), localStograge

Q- what is Server Components
    Server components improve performance by reducing client-side JavaScript.
    as it runs on server, we cant use useState..., browser apis

Q- Server vs client
    Server
        Render only on the server — their code never ships to the client bundle
        Can async/await directly, query databases, read secrets
        Cannot use browser APIs, event handlers, or stateful hooks
    Client
        Render on the clien
        Must add "use client" directive at the top
    Server Components can import and render Client Components — but not the reverse.
    You can pass Server Components as children/props into Client Components though:


Q- How To Enable & Maximize Tree Shaking
    Tree shaking reduces bundle size by eliminating dead code at build time.
        Use Import/Export syntax, dont use require()
        Use named exports over default exports:
        Avoid importing entire libraries:
        Use libraries that support tree shaking:

Q- How to design Scalable Frontend Architecture
    1. Architecture Approach - Use seperate module, for features like fight, hotel, payment
    2. Rendering - SEO Pages (SSR/ISR), Highly interactive Page (CSR), User Server components
    3. State management - Local State, Global State, React Query for Caching, Avoid overusing context and props drilling
    4. Performance - code splitting, fynamic import, Vistualization, Image optimization, lazy loading, CDN
    5. Folder Structure - Atomic Design
    6. monitoring
    I focus on scalability, performance, separation of concerns, and minimizing re-renders while keeping the architecture maintainable for future teams.

Q- Server side or client side, which to choose
    SSR — server does the heavy lifting, user gets content fast, but needs hydration to become interactive.
    SSG- SEO better, user see content on first load
    CSR — browser does the heavy lifting, user waits longer initially, but gets a snappy app experience afterwards.
    CSR - user see blank screen, bad for seo on first load
    - After first load, CSR wins, as no server transition needed, page trans are faster

Q- event.preventDefault() and event.stopPropagation()
    preventDefault -  method is used in JavaScript to stop the default action that naturally belongs to an event from occurring
    stopPropagation - stops an event from bubbling up (or capturing down) the DOM tree.

Q- Event Delegation
    Event Delegation means attaching a single event listener on a parent element to handle events from multiple child elements,
    instead of adding listeners to each child individually.

Q- Event Bubbling and Event Capturing
    Bubbling - events automatically travel up the DOM tree from child to parent.
    Capturing - Capturing descends from the outermost ancestor to the target
    By default, event listeners use the bubbling phase. To listen in the capturing phase, pass true as the third argument:

Q- Primitive vs non-primitive
    Primitive values are immutable, compared by value ( string, number, boolean, null).
    Non-primitive are mutable, compared by reference (Object, Arr)

Q- Promise.all vs .race vs .any
    .all - Waits for all to succeed. If any one fails, it immediately rejects.
    .allSettled - Waits for all to finish, regardless of success or failure. (never rejects, always give outcome)
    .race - Returns the result of whichever promise finishes first (resolve or reject).
    .any - Returns the first one that succeeds. Ignores rejections unless all fail

Q- How browser requests work
    1.User initate a request
    2.Browser check cache for IP, if not found check DNS servers
    3.established a TCP conenctions
    4.Browser send http request to server
    5.server process request
    6.server send http response
    7.browser render content ( parse html, make request for css na js, build DOm, paint on screen)

Q- lifecycle in class
    - Mount phase
        Constructor -> render -> componentdidmount()
    - Update
        shouldComponentupdate -> render -> compoenntdidupdate
    - unmount
        componentWillUnmount

Q- frontend architecture for a large scale 
    - Performance
        LCP, CLS, FCP, TTFB, 
    - Scalability
        CDN, Caching, Redis(rate limiting), Tan-Stack Query (client side cache)
    - Maintainablity
        Folder Structure
    - Rendering strategy
        Decide SSR, CSR, SSG
    - State Management

Q- How do you optimize React re-renders?
    React.memo
    useMemo, useCallback
    Split Context API
    State colocation
    Virtualization for large list
    useTransition - lets you mark updates as non-urgent so they don't block the UI

Q- React 19
    - React compiler - no need to write useMemo, useCallback
    - Server components

Q- React 18
    - Concurrent Rendering
        Before React 18, rendering was a single, uninterrupted, synchronous transaction and once rendering started, it couldn’t be interrupted
        In React 18 with concurrent rendering, React can interrupt, pause, resume, or abandon a render. This allows React to respond to the
        user interaction quickly even if it is in the middle of a heavy rendering task
    - automatic Batching
        React 18 automatically groups multiple state updates inside promises, timeouts, or native event handlers into a single re-render, reducing performance overhead
    - useTransition
         Allows developers to distinguish between urgent updates
            ✅ You own and control the state being updated
            ✅ You want isPending to show explicit loading UI
            ✅ Multiple state updates that should batch as non-urgent
            ✅ Navigation between routes/tabs
            ✅ Form submissions that trigger expensive re-renders
    - useDeferredValue - A key detail with useDeferredValue is that it does nothing without useMemo — you have to memoize the expensive computation against the deferred value, otherwise the expensive work still runs on every render.
            ✅ Value comes from props or external source
            ✅ You can't access the setState call
            ✅ Working with third-party components
            ✅ Want to show stale content instead of spinner
            ✅ Wrapping a child component you don't control
    - Suspense on the Server
    - useLayoutEffect introudced in React16 -> 

Q- NextJS new features
    Next13
        - App router introuced in next13
        - optimised next/image, next/font, next/link
    Next14
        - Partial Pre-rendering
        - Turbopack improvements
        - Stable server actions
    Next15
        - Partial Pre-rendering stable
        - React 19

Q- What is memory leak
    A memoery which is allocated but Garbage collector can't collected it bevause someone still holds a reference to it.
    In react it is, timers, eventListner, fetch call. we handled by cleanup func in  useEffect - AbortController for fetch, 
    clearInterval, clearTimeout for timers, removeEventListner for events. and also use chrome dev tools to check 
    heap snapshots.

Q- what is garbage collector?
    automatic memory management system that identify and free memory that is no longer needed.

Q- Reduce bundle size  
    - Tree shaking - use of import/export instad of require
    - code splitting
    - replace heavy libraries
    - optimise image
    - font optimise
    - script
    - gzip Compression
    
Q- Explain CSR vs SSR vs SSG vs ISR with real use case
    Static pages like blogs and marketing use SSG for maximum speed. Product pages that change occasionally use ISR so they stay
    fresh without server cost on every request. Personalized or real-time pages use SSR. Highly interactive dashboards behind auth 
    use CSR since SEO doesn't matter.
    CSR - Dashboard, Cart etc.
    SSR - SEO purpose page - Personalized pages (user-specific pricing, recommendations), search page
    SSG - blog, static pages
    ISR - product pages
    PPR - 

Q- useTransition and useDeferredValue
    Both useTransition and useDeferredValue are React 18 concurrent features that mark updates as non-urgent so React can 
    prioritize user interactions over expensive renders. The difference is where control lives. useTransition wraps the state 
    setter — use it when you own the state and want an isPending flag to show explicit loading UI. useDeferredValue wraps the 
    value — use it when the value comes from props or an external source you can't control, and you want to keep showing stale
    content while the expensive render catches up. A key detail with useDeferredValue is that it does nothing without useMemo — 
    you have to memoize the expensive computation against the deferred value, otherwise the expensive work still runs on every 
    render. In practice I use useTransition for navigation and filter interactions where I control state, and useDeferredValue 
    in child components that receive props from parents and need to defer expensive rendering independently.

Q- Flexbox vs Grid
    - Flexbox is one dimernsional and content driven layout (How much space does content need?)
    - Grid is two dimernsional and layout driven layout (Put content into defined areas)

Q- Rest vs GraphQL
    Rest - Multiple endpoints, server decides what data you get
    GraphQL - Single endpoint, client decides what data it needs ( solved - overfetching, underfetching, frontend/backend cordinations)

Q- Approach architectural questions-
    - Rendering Strategy in NextJS - ISR, CSR, SSR and then seo also
    - CDN - for asset optimisation
    - CMS - if any frequesnt content and changes req - Strapi
    - StateManagement - for global use Redux and for local use Zustand or context api
    - Feature first folder Structure
    - Performance - Focus on core web vitals, code splitting
    - API layer - Graphql,
    - 

Q- Call, bind and apply
    All are used to set "this" for a function, difference is how you pass argument and when the function execeutes.

    - Call - function execeute immediately, arguments passes one by one.
    - apply - function execeute immediately, arguments passes as an array.
    - bind - function does not execeute immediately, it returns a function with this permanentyl bounded. arguments passes one by one.

    function introduce(greeting, age, city) {
        console.log(`${greeting}! I'm ${this.name}, ${age} years old from ${city}`);
    }

    const person = { name: 'Alice' };

    // call - args one by one
    introduce.call(person, 'Hello', 25, 'NYC');
    // "Hello! I'm Alice, 25 years old from NYC"

    // apply - args as array
    introduce.apply(person, ['Hi', 25, 'NYC']);
    // "Hi! I'm Alice, 25 years old from NYC"

    // bind - returns new function, can split args
    const boundFn = introduce.bind(person, 'Hey'); // pre-fill greeting
    boundFn(25, 'NYC');                             // pass rest later
    // "Hey! I'm Alice, 25 years old from NYC"

Q- Stale Closures
    A stale closure is when a function "remembers" an old value of a variable from when it was created, even though the 
    variable has since updated.
    Ex- in react and js  - count in setInterval

Q- Aria-label
    It is an accessiblity attribute that provides description for screen readers

Q- manifest in html

Q- Web workers
    Web Workers let you run JavaScript in a background thread, separate from the main UI thread — preventing heavy tasks
    from freezing the UI
    check example how to do it

Q- What is callback? 
    A callback is a function passed as an argument to another function, to be called later.
    Not all callback are asynchronous.
    ex - [1,2,3].forEach(num => console.log(num)); // callback runs sync
    setTimeout(() => console.log('later'), 1000); // callback runs async

Q- callback hell? how it leads to solve promise?
    When you have nested callbacks inside callbacks creating a deeply indented, hard to read "pyramid of doom"

Q- is JavaScript synchronous or asynchronous?
    JavaScript is fundamentally synchronous and single-threaded, but it is able to handle asynchronous operations through
    mechanisms provided by its runtime environment (like the browser or Node.js).
    To avoid blocking the main thread during long-running tasks like network requests (fetching data from an API), file
    operations, or timers, the JavaScript runtime environment steps in. These environments provide Web APIs (in the browser)
    or Node APIs (in Node.js) that handle these tasks in the background, off the main.

Q- React run in two phase
    Render phase - React renders components from parent → child:
    Commit phase - After React paints the DOM, effects run from child → parent

Q- What are the key differences between App Router and Pages Router in Next.js?
    In Pages Router, routing is purely file-based and layouts must be manually wrapped inside each page. In App Router,
    routing is based on nested route segments and layouts are built into the filesystem, allowing persistent nested layouts
    that do not re-render during navigation.
    Date Fetching different getServerSideProp in pages and we can fetch directly in app
    Component is client in pages and server by default in app router

Q- What is a Server Component in Next.js?
    runs only on server, no JS send to client, sends HTML + RSC payload to the client, can directly call DB, API calls, Improve performance

Q- When do we use "use client"
    if component needs useState, useEffect, browser API, event handlers
    Once you mark a component "use client", all its children become client components.

Q- How does data fetching work in App Router?
    Using fetch directly
    fetch is cached by default, means Next.js treats this like Static Site Generation (SSG) - data fetched once, stored in cache, and reused for every request
    Now even if supporse product 100 is cached, and if product changes to 105, it is still cached.

    How to make above dynamic?
        Method 1 — cache: "no-store"
        similar to getServerSideProps - data fetched every request
        This disables caching only for that specific fetch request.
        Ex - 
        await fetch("https://api.com/products", {
            cache: "no-store",
        })
         await fetch("https://api.com/orders")

        Method 2 — force-dynamic
        export const dynamic = "force-dynamic"  
        This disables caching for the entire route/page. 
        Ex - 
        export default async function Page() {
        const res = await fetch("https://api.com/products")
        const data = await res.json()

        return <div>{data.length}</div>
        }

        Method 3- Revalidation
        You can cache but refresh after some time. - like ISR
        fetch("https://api.com/products", {
            next: { revalidate: 60 }
        })


Q- Explain the three caching strategies in Next.js App Router
    "Next.js App Router has three caching layers: Request Memoization which deduplicates fetch calls within a single request,
    Data Cache which stores API responses across requests, and Full Route Cache which caches the rendered page output for 
    static routes."
    1. Static Rendering
    2. Dynamic Rendering
    3. ISR (Revalidation)

Q- Layout System? What is layout.js?
    Layouts allow persistent UI across routes.
    State preserved
    No Re-render on navigation

Q- What is streaming in Next.js?
    Streaming allows sending HTML in chunks instead of waiting for full page.

Q- What replaced API routes in App Router?
    route.js file

Q-  What is Partial Rendering in Next.js?

Q- Explain Server Actions
    Server actions allow calling server functions from client components.

Q- What happens internally when you navigate between pages in Next.js App Router?
    Steps:
    1️⃣ Client sends request for route segment
    2️⃣ Server renders React Server Component tree
    3️⃣ Server sends RSC payload
    4️⃣ Client merges it with existing UI
    5️⃣ Only changed components update

    This avoids full page reload.

Q- What is the RSC Payload?
    RSC payload contains:
        Serialized represetation of server component tree
          It contains
            Component structure
            Fetched Data
            reference to client component

    Client uses it to reconstruct UI without sending full JS.

Q- Can a Server Component import a Client Component?
    YES, but opposite now allowed

Q- How does Next.js implement React Server Components internally?
    Next.js uses React Flight protocol to implement Server Components.
    "Next.js implements React Server Components using the React Flight protocol. Server components render on the server, and React serializes the component tree into an RSC payload. This payload is streamed to the client along with HTML, and the client reconstructs the UI while hydrating only client components."
    - Browser Request
    - Next.js Server - Server renders Server Components
    - React Server Components render - React creates an RSC Payload()
    - React Flight Payload (JSON-like format) - React converts the component tree into a React Flight payload.
    - Client receives payload - Next.js sends two things: 1. HTML 2. RSC PAyload
    - React reconstructs component tree - Browser downloads the client JS bundle, Server components do not hydrate, Only client components hydrate.
    Nextjs build two bundles - server and client (Server components never ship JS., that is why Smaller JS bundle)

Q- Why does navigation not reset component state?
    Because layouts persist between route changes.
    Sol- Use template.js instead of layout.

Q- layout vs template.js?
    Layout
        does not re-render when navigating between child routes
        State is preserved, DOM is not recreated
    Template
        re-mounts on every navigation
        State is not preserved, effects re-run

Q- How would you reduce bundle size in a large Next.js app?
    server components
    dynamic imports
    remove client components
    lazy load heavy libraries
    tree shaking

Q- Layout Behavior
    app/
    layout.js
    dashboard/
        layout.js
        page.js

    1️⃣ If a user navigates between: /dashboard/analytics /dashboard/settings
        In App Router, layouts are persistent across navigation within the same route segment.
        So Next.js does not re-render the layout. Only the page segment changes.
        This is called Partial Rendering.

Q- what happens when we click on link tag in nextjs? Explain what happens internally in Next.js App Router.
    <Link href="/products">Products</Link>
        Next.js uses client-side navigation through the Next.js Router.
        It interecept the click, prevent full page reload, and fetches only required route segment


Q- Parallel Routes & Intercepting Routes

Q- Server Actions (+ security pitfalls)
    Server Actions let you run server-side code directly from components — no API route needed.
    No fetch, no API route, no onSubmit handler. The <form action> directly accepts the server action.
        1. Server Actions are public HTTP endpoints
            Every server action compiles down to a POST endpoint. Anyone can call it directly — not just your UI.
        2.  Don't expose sensitive data in return values
    
Q- 4 caching layer
    - Request Memoization - Deduplicates identical fetch() calls within a single render pass.
    - Data Cache - fetch request cached by default
    - Full Route Cache - Caches the full rendered HTML + RSC payload of statically generated routes at build time.
        Below statemenet makes full route cache disable (What makes a route dynamic (opts out of Full Route Cache))
        export const dynamic = "force-dynamic";
        export const revalidate = 0;
        cookies, headers, searchParams
    - Router cache
        Client-side in-memory cache of RSC payloads for routes the user has visited (Browser)
            Below statemenet makes opt out
            router.refresh()
            revalidatePath()